README.md, before:

# MicroStream Jakarta Usage Patterns

Patterns in using MicroStream's CDI integration

This repository contains a few example projects that demonstrate how MicroStream and
the MicroStream CDI/MicroProfile Config integration can be used in a project.

It is not the idea to have all best practices around application development covered
in these examples but only some patterns that can be used to work with the Object Graph that
makes your database within the JVM heap (and persist data with MicroStream).  
So aspects like security and observability are not covered but are also not affected by using MicroStream in your Jakarta application.

## General concepts

The following are a few general concepts that are applied within the examples.

- The examples are mainly centered around using JAX-RS endpoints to process user requests.
- The *Controller* classes are responsible for defining the JAX-RS endpoint signatures (HTTP method, URLs, ...) and some validation on the received data (structures). So the _Controller_ is not responsible for validating the business rules (does the user exists, can the customer place an order, ...) but merely some validation of the received values/structures (Are values in a certain range like non-negative for age, does the supplied JSON has a property email, ...)
- The *Service* classes are responsible for validating the business rules of your application.  They should not have any JAX-RS-specific relation so in case there is a problem with a request, a RuntimeException-based exception can be thrown.

## Example

The example supports (in a limited way) the management of a library.  You have the concept books and users who can lend a book.

You can perform the following actions

- Retrieve all known books.
- Retrieve all known users.
- Add a new User.
- Update the email address of a User.
- Retrieve the books assigned to a user.
- Assign a book to the user.

Although the application is still limited in functionality, it is already a bit more elaborated than a hello-world style application. With a hello-world style example, we would have the danger of showing patterns that do not apply to the real world.

# Plain

Without the integration code, see directory _plain_.

Without any integration code, you need to expose a CDI bean for the `StorageManager`. This is performed by the `DataConfiguration` class.  The class is injected with the configuration value `one.microstream.config` which will give us the location of the MicroStream configuration file. It also has a reference to the class that performs the initialisation of books and users when the storage is started for the very first time.

The CDI producer method performs the different steps in a similar way as when you use MicroStream in a Java SE program.  It creates the `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` with the configuration file, it customizes the Foundation, creates the _StorageManager_, and initializes with data if needed.

# Lazily started StorageManager

Since all CDI beans are only instantiated at the time they are accessed for the first time, the _StorageManager_ defined through the CDI integration is only started when the first user request is handled.

If you want to initialize the _StorageManager_ early to have for example no performance impact on the first request, you can use a similar class as

```
@ApplicationScoped
public class StartupInitializedBean {

    @ApplicationScoped
    private StorageManager storageManager;

    public void init( @Observes @Initialized( ApplicationScoped.class ) Object init ) {
        storageManager.isRunning();  // Make sure we trigger the actual bean as we might have proxies.
    }
}
```

Although the MicroProfile Config specification describes that the conversion should be performed during the deployment of the application to determine the validity of the configuration, the _StorageManager_ is not created at deployment time.  Only the configuration properties are read and an `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` is created, but the actual instantiation of the _StorageManager_ is delayed until it is actually used by the application by using a Proxy.

See _MicroProfile Config converter_ section.

# Proposed changes

The following is the list of proposed changes to make the code (of your application) better structured and integration with MicroStream easier.

The examples require the code from https://github.com/microstream-one/microstream/pull/398 to compile and work.

# Foundation customizer

See directory _foundation-customizer_

The new version of the integration has implemented the following steps so that you can use a _StorageManager_ based CDI bean. (and as the developer keep full control of customizations and initializations)

- Build `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` from the MicroProfile Configuration values
- Allow customizations by the developer `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` using `EmbeddedStorageFoundationCustomizer`
- Integration creates the `StorageManager`
- Allow initialization of the `StorageManager` (like adding initial data when storage is created at the first run) through `StorageManagerInitializer`.

The code within the `DataConfiguration` of the _plain_ example becomes now better structured and results in the classes `FoundationCustomizer` and `RootPreparation`.

```
@ApplicationScoped
public class FoundationCustomizer implements EmbeddedStorageFoundationCustomizer {

    @Override
    public void customize(EmbeddedStorageFoundation embeddedStorageFoundation) {
      // Do customization
    }
}
```

```
@ApplicationScoped
public class RootPreparation implements StorageManagerInitializer {

    private static final Logger LOGGER = LoggerFactory.getLogger(RootPreparation.class);

    @Override
    public void initialize(StorageManager storageManager) {
       // Check if Root is available (and assign if needed) and add initial data if needed.
    }
}    
```

The addition of these 2 interfaces and using them when the CDI Bean for the _StorageManager_ is created, makes the code better structured as each class has its own purpose.
It also allows to make use of all the MicroProfile Config sources that your runtime supports to define the configuration of the MicroStream engine.

# Root CDI Bean

See directory _root-bean_.

Within the _Service_ beans, we accessed the Root object through the _StorageManager_ bean.  Although this works, it is a bit cumbersome to always retrieve the root in that way.

With this updated version of the integration, the Root object can also be turned into a CDI Bean by annotation it with `@Storage`.

```
@Storage
public class Root {

    @Inject
    private transient StorageManager storageManager;
```

The _storage_ annotation is a custom annotation that is both a `@Component` and `@Qualifier`.  That way it can be detected by the Spring Boot integration and made sure that it is a Spring Bean but also correctly registered with the Storage manager.

Since it is a Spring Bean, you can also inject other beans into it, like the _StorageBean_. Since the integration is responsible for creating the Root object instance if needed (through a special factory method) using standard Java constructs, only Field and Setter injection is allowed (and not constructor injection)

# Using MicroProfile Config converter

See directory _microprofile_.

The CDI integration also has a MicroProfile Config converter available and can be used as in the following example.

```
@Inject
@ConfigProperty(name = "one.microstream.config")
protected StorageManager storageManager;
```

The _one.microstream.config_ is resolved and is expected to point to a file that contains the MicroStream configuration values (without the prefix, for a description see [User documentation](https://docs.microstream.one/manual/storage/configuration/properties.html) page.

The usage of this converter also supports the _customizer_ and _initializer_  we mentioned already.

The usage of this converter can be useful in the following scenarios.

- Separate the configuration of the _StorageManager_ from the other configuration values of your application. Only the name of the file is needed within a Microprofile Config Source.
- Have the ability to configure multiple _StorageManager_'s within 1 application.

# Multiple Storage Managers

See directory _multiple_.
This example dies not use the library app as implemented by the other examples.

Using the MicroProfile Config Converter option, you can configure multiple _StorageManager_'s within 1 Jakarta application.  The _customizer_ and _initializer_ concept is supported as mentioned and you can distinguish the different `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` and `StorageManager` with the help of the _Database_ concept of MicroStream.

If you define a configuration value `database-name` within the file (properties, ini, or XML file in the appropriate format), this name is assigned to the _Foundation_ and _StorageManager_.  Within the _customize_ and _initialize_ methods, you can find out which instance you received from the integration and perform the appropriate actions.

```
database-name=red
```

And the code looks like

```
public void customize(EmbeddedStorageFoundation embeddedStorageFoundation) {
   if ("red".equals(embeddedStorageFoundation.getDataBaseName())) {
      customizeRedIinstance(embeddedStorageFoundation);
   }
   if ("green".equals(embeddedStorageFoundation.getDataBaseName())) {
      customizeGreenIinstance(embeddedStorageFoundation);
   }
   ...
}

public void initialize(StorageManager storageManager) {
   if ("red".equals(storageManager.databaseName())) {   
      initializeRedInstance(storageManager);
   }
   if ("green".equals(storageManager.databaseName())) {   
      initializeGreenInstance(storageManager);
   }
   ...
}
```

Commit message:

Add examples for Jakarta EE 10

README.md, after:

# MicroStream Jakarta Usage Patterns

Patterns in using MicroStream's CDI integration

This repository contains a few example projects that demonstrate how MicroStream and
the MicroStream CDI/MicroProfile Config integration can be used in a project.

All examples are available for Jakarta EE 8 and EE 10 and can be found in a directory that is named corresponding to these versions.

The _commands.txt_ file in each project directory indicates the commands to start Payara Micro and the CURL commands to test the application.  For Jakarta EE 8, Payara Micro 5, is no longer supported as a free open-source version, and Payara Micro 6 for Jakarta EE 10 is used.


It is not the idea to have all best practices around application development covered
in these examples but only some patterns which can be used to work with the Object Graph that
makes your database within the JVM heap (and persist data with MicroStream).  
So aspects like security and observability are not covered but are also not affected by using MicroStream in your Jakarta application.

## General concepts

The following are a few general concepts that are applied within the examples.

- The examples are mainly centered around using JAX-RS endpoints to process user requests.
- The *Controller* classes are responsible for defining the JAX-RS endpoint signatures (HTTP method, URLs, ...) and some validation on the received data (structures). So the _Controller_ is not responsible for validating the business rules (does the user exists, can the customer place an order, ...) but merely some validation of the received values/structures (Are values in a certain range like non-negative for age, does the supplied JSON has a property email, ...)
- The *Service* classes are responsible for validating the business rules of your application.  They should not have any JAX-RS-specific relation so in case there is a problem with a request, a RuntimeException-based exception can be thrown.

## Example

The example supports (in a limited way) the management of a library.  You have the concept books and users who can lend a book.

You can perform the following actions

- Retrieve all known books.
- Retrieve all known users.
- Add a new User.
- Update the email address of a User.
- Retrieve the books assigned to a user.
- Assign a book to the user.

Although the application is still limited in functionality, it is already a bit more elaborated than a hello-world style application. With a hello-world style example, we would have the danger of showing patterns that do not apply to the real world.

# Plain

Without the integration code, see directory _plain_.

Without any integration code, you need to expose a CDI bean for the `StorageManager`. This is performed by the `DataConfiguration` class.  The class is injected with the configuration value `one.microstream.config` which will give us the location of the MicroStream configuration file. It also has a reference to the class that performs the initialisation of books and users when the storage is started for the very first time.

The CDI producer method performs the different steps in a similar way as when you use MicroStream in a Java SE program.  It creates the `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` with the configuration file, it customizes the Foundation, creates the _StorageManager_, and initializes with data if needed.

# Lazily started StorageManager

Since all CDI beans are only instantiated at the time they are accessed for the first time, the _StorageManager_ defined through the CDI integration is only started when the first user request is handled.

If you want to initialize the _StorageManager_ early to have for example no performance impact on the first request, you can use a similar class as

```
@ApplicationScoped
public class StartupInitializedBean {

    @ApplicationScoped
    private StorageManager storageManager;

    public void init( @Observes @Initialized( ApplicationScoped.class ) Object init ) {
        storageManager.isRunning();  // Make sure we trigger the actual bean as we might have proxies.
    }
}
```

Although the MicroProfile Config specification describes that the conversion should be performed during the deployment of the application to determine the validity of the configuration, the _StorageManager_ is not created at deployment time.  Only the configuration properties are read and an `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` is created, but the actual instantiation of the _StorageManager_ is delayed until it is actually used by the application by using a Proxy.

See _MicroProfile Config converter_ section.

# Proposed changes

The following is the list of proposed changes to make the code (of your application) better structured and integration with MicroStream easier.

The examples require the code from https://github.com/microstream-one/microstream/pull/398 to compile and work.

# Foundation customizer

See directory _foundation-customizer_

The new version of the integration has implemented the following steps so that you can use a _StorageManager_ based CDI bean. (and as the developer keep full control of customizations and initializations)

- Build `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` from the MicroProfile Configuration values
- Allow customizations by the developer `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` using `EmbeddedStorageFoundationCustomizer`
- Integration creates the `StorageManager`
- Allow initialization of the `StorageManager` (like adding initial data when storage is created at the first run) through `StorageManagerInitializer`.

The code within the `DataConfiguration` of the _plain_ example becomes now better structured and results in the classes `FoundationCustomizer` and `RootPreparation`.

```
@ApplicationScoped
public class FoundationCustomizer implements EmbeddedStorageFoundationCustomizer {

    @Override
    public void customize(EmbeddedStorageFoundation embeddedStorageFoundation) {
      // Do customization
    }
}
```

```
@ApplicationScoped
public class RootPreparation implements StorageManagerInitializer {

    private static final Logger LOGGER = LoggerFactory.getLogger(RootPreparation.class);

    @Override
    public void initialize(StorageManager storageManager) {
       // Check if Root is available (and assign if needed) and add initial data if needed.
    }
}    
```

The addition of these 2 interfaces and using them when the CDI Bean for the _StorageManager_ is created, makes the code better structured as each class has its own purpose.
It also allows to make use of all the MicroProfile Config sources that your runtime supports to define the configuration of the MicroStream engine.

# Root CDI Bean

See directory _root-bean_.

Within the _Service_ beans, we accessed the Root object through the _StorageManager_ bean.  Although this works, it is a bit cumbersome to always retrieve the root in that way.

With this updated version of the integration, the Root object can also be turned into a CDI Bean by annotation it with `@Storage`.

```
@Storage
public class Root {

    @Inject
    private transient StorageManager storageManager;
```

The _storage_ annotation is a custom annotation that is both a `@Component` and `@Qualifier`.  That way it can be detected by the Spring Boot integration and made sure that it is a Spring Bean but also correctly registered with the Storage manager.

Since it is a Spring Bean, you can also inject other beans into it, like the _StorageBean_. Since the integration is responsible for creating the Root object instance if needed (through a special factory method) using standard Java constructs, only Field and Setter injection is allowed (and not constructor injection)

# Using MicroProfile Config converter

See directory _microprofile_.

The CDI integration also has a MicroProfile Config converter available and can be used as in the following example.

```
@Inject
@ConfigProperty(name = "one.microstream.config")
protected StorageManager storageManager;
```

The _one.microstream.config_ is resolved and is expected to point to a file that contains the MicroStream configuration values (without the prefix, for a description see [User documentation](https://docs.microstream.one/manual/storage/configuration/properties.html) page.

The usage of this converter also supports the _customizer_ and _initializer_  we mentioned already.

The usage of this converter can be useful in the following scenarios.

- Separate the configuration of the _StorageManager_ from the other configuration values of your application. Only the name of the file is needed within a Microprofile Config Source.
- Have the ability to configure multiple _StorageManager_'s within 1 application.

# Multiple Storage Managers

See directory _multiple_.
This example dies not use the library app as implemented by the other examples.

Using the MicroProfile Config Converter option, you can configure multiple _StorageManager_'s within 1 Jakarta application.  The _customizer_ and _initializer_ concept is supported as mentioned and you can distinguish the different `EmbeddedStorageFoundation` and `StorageManager` with the help of the _Database_ concept of MicroStream.

If you define a configuration value `database-name` within the file (properties, ini, or XML file in the appropriate format), this name is assigned to the _Foundation_ and _StorageManager_.  Within the _customize_ and _initialize_ methods, you can find out which instance you received from the integration and perform the appropriate actions.

```
database-name=red
```

And the code looks like

```
public void customize(EmbeddedStorageFoundation embeddedStorageFoundation) {
   if ("red".equals(embeddedStorageFoundation.getDataBaseName())) {
      customizeRedIinstance(embeddedStorageFoundation);
   }
   if ("green".equals(embeddedStorageFoundation.getDataBaseName())) {
      customizeGreenIinstance(embeddedStorageFoundation);
   }
   ...
}

public void initialize(StorageManager storageManager) {
   if ("red".equals(storageManager.databaseName())) {   
      initializeRedInstance(storageManager);
   }
   if ("green".equals(storageManager.databaseName())) {   
      initializeGreenInstance(storageManager);
   }
   ...
}
```
